https://www.d20srd.org/srd/skills/spellcraft.htm

Spellcraft (Int; Trained Only)

	Use this skill to identify spells as they are cast or spells already in place.

Check

	You can identify spells and magic effects. The DCs for Spellcraft checks relating to various tasks are summarized on the table below.



Spellcraft DC

Task



13

When using 
read magic
, identify a 
glyph of warding
. No action required.



15 + spell level

Identify a spell being cast. (You must see or hear the spell’s verbal or somatic components.) No action required. No retry.



15 + spell level

Learn a spell from a spellbook or scroll (
wizard
 only). No retry for that spell until you gain at least 1 rank in Spellcraft (even if you find another source to try to learn the spell from). Requires 8 hours.



15 + spell level

Prepare a spell from a borrowed spellbook (
wizard
 only). One try per day. No extra time required.



15 + spell level

When casting 
detect magic
, determine the school of magic involved in the aura of a single item or creature you can see. (If the aura is not a spell effect, the DC is 15 + one-half caster level.) No action required.



19

When using 
read magic
, identify a symbol. No action required.



20 + spell level

Identify a spell that’s already in place and in effect. You must be able to see or detect the effects of the spell. No action required. No retry.



20 + spell level

Identify materials created or shaped by magic, such as noting that an iron wall is the result of a 
wall of iron
 spell. No action required. No retry.



20 + spell level

Decipher a written spell (such as a scroll) without using 
read magic
. One try per day. Requires a 
full-round action
.



25 + spell level

After rolling a 
saving throw
 against a spell targeted on you, determine what that spell was. No action required. No retry.



25

Identify a potion. Requires 1 minute. No retry.



20

Draw a diagram to allow 
dimensional anchor
 to be cast on a magic circle spell. Requires 10 minutes. No retry. This check is made secretly so you do not know the result.



30 or higher

Understand a strange or unique magical effect, such as the effects of a magic stream. Time required varies. No retry.



	See also: 
epic usages
 of Spellcraft.

Action

	Varies, as noted above.

Try Again

	See above.

Special

	If you are a specialist 
wizard
, you get a +2 bonus on Spellcraft checks when dealing with a spell or effect from your specialty school. You take a -5 penalty when dealing with a spell or effect from a prohibited school (and some tasks, such as learning a prohibited spell, are just impossible).

	If you have the 
Magical Aptitude
 feat, you get a +2 bonus on Spellcraft checks.

Synergy


If you have 5 or more ranks in 
Knowledge
 (arcana), you get a +2 bonus on Spellcraft checks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in 
Use Magic Device
, you get a +2 bonus on Spellcraft checks to decipher spells on scrolls.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Spellcraft, you get a +2 bonus on 
Use Magic Device
 checks related to scrolls.


	Additionally, certain spells allow you to gain information about magic, provided that you make a successful Spellcraft check as detailed in the spell description.


- GOOGLE 300x250 ADS -


- LEFT -

 /1004459/d20srd300x250-1 




- RIGHT -

 /1004459/d20srd300x250-2 





- END GOOGLE 300x250 ADS -

		The Hypertext d20 SRD
TM
 is owned by 
BoLS Interactive LLC
.	

		The text on this page is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under the terms of the 
Open Game License v1.0a
.	

		‘d20 System’ and the ‘d20 System’ logo are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
and are used according to the terms of the d20 System License version 6.0.
A copy of this License can be found at 
www.wizards.com/d20
.	

 removing standards place holder 


 Quantcast Tag 



 End Quantcast tag 


