https://www.d20srd.org/srd/skills/swim.htm

Swim (Str; Armor Check Penalty)

Check

	Make a Swim check once per round while you are in the water. Success means you may swim at up to one-half your speed (as a 
full-round action
) or at one-quarter your speed (as a 
move action
). If you fail by 4 or less, you make no progress through the water. If you fail by 5 or more, you go underwater.

	If you are underwater, either because you failed a Swim check or because you are swimming underwater intentionally, you must hold your breath. You can hold your breath for a number of rounds equal to twice your Constitution score, but only if you do nothing other than take 
move actions
 or 
free actions
. If you take a 
standard action
 or a 
full-round action
 (such as making an attack), the remainder of the duration for which you can hold your breath is reduced by 1 round. (Effectively, a character in combat can hold his or her breath only half as long as normal.) After that period of time, you must make a DC 10 Constitution check every round to continue holding your breath. Each round, the DC for that check increases by 1. If you fail the Constitution check, you begin to 
drown
.

	The DC for the Swim check depends on the water, as given on the table below.


Swim DCs



Water

Swim DC







You can’t 
take 10
 on a Swim check in stormy water, even if you aren’t otherwise being threatened or distracted.







Calm water

10



Rough water

15



Stormy water

20
1




	Each hour that you swim, you must make a DC 20 Swim check or take 1d6 points of 
nonlethal damage
 from fatigue.

	See also: 
epic usages
 of Swim.

Action

	A successful Swim check allows you to swim one-quarter of your speed as a 
move action
 or one-half your speed as a 
full-round action
.

Special

	Swim checks are subject to double the normal armor check penalty and encumbrance penalty.

	If you have the 
Athletic
 feat, you get a +2 bonus on Swim checks.

	If you have the 
Endurance
 feat, you get a +4 bonus on Swim checks made to avoid taking 
nonlethal damage
 from fatigue.

	A creature with a swim speed can move through water at its indicated speed without making Swim checks. It gains a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to perform a special action or avoid a hazard. The creature always can choose to 
take 10
 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered when swimming. Such a creature can use the 
run
 action while swimming, provided that it swims in a straight line.


- GOOGLE 300x250 ADS -


- LEFT -

 /1004459/d20srd300x250-1 




- RIGHT -

 /1004459/d20srd300x250-2 





- END GOOGLE 300x250 ADS -

		The Hypertext d20 SRD
TM
 is owned by 
BoLS Interactive LLC
.	

		The text on this page is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under the terms of the 
Open Game License v1.0a
.	

		‘d20 System’ and the ‘d20 System’ logo are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
and are used according to the terms of the d20 System License version 6.0.
A copy of this License can be found at 
www.wizards.com/d20
.	

 removing standards place holder 


 Quantcast Tag 



 End Quantcast tag 


