The Hypertext d20 SRD TM  is intended to be a useful supplement to published rulebooks. It is not intended to replace them. I see my gaming library as a valuable collection that I derive much pleasure from. There is no way that this site could duplicate the experience of reading a beautifully designed and illustrated book. But, there are some BIG advantages  that this site has over printed materials: Speed This site is a lightning-fast reference for the d20 system rules you use most. Speeding up mundane activities (such as looking up rules) has a major positive impact on the gaming experience. There are three ways this site is quicker to use than printed rulebooks: Hyperlinked Indexes : When you find a topic in one of these tables of contents, you don’t have to find a page number, you just click! Contextual Hyperlinks (56,462 so far) : When you’re reading along, and run across a game term that you don’t know, just click on it! Searchability : Don’t remember where the rules for drowning are located? Type it in the search engine! Durability You can’t wear this site out. I dare you. Try it. The same can’t be said of your cherished rulebooks. Eases Learning Learning the d20 rule system can be a daunting task for beginners and even the most learned rules scholar needs a refresher now and again. There are hundreds of game terms that are unfamiliar to the uninitiated. Now the fledgling gamer can just click on the esoteric jargon instead of flailing and flipping pages. Accessibility With surprising frequency people find themselves with access to the internet, but not to their rulebooks. I've received emails from soldiers stationed overseas to folks slacking off at work that are happy to have access to d20 rules. I know of no Braille  editions of d20 rulebooks. This site has been built with accessibility in mind. If you’re using a screen reader, or even a palm pilot, this site is built for you. How to Use This Site I know. It sounds pretty silly. Of course you know how to use a Web site, but read on… You never know what you may learn. Add the Home Page to Your Bookmarks Bar Now you have a Home  > xxx  button no matter how far you're scrolled down on a page. Use Mozilla Firefox I know this is a big leap for many of you, but Firefox  offers several features that really enhance the usefulness  and usability  of this site. I'ts worth downloading Firefox even if you only use it for this site! This site also uses several W3C  standards that are NOT  supported by Internet Explorer. The Hypertext d20 SRD will look better  using a compliant browser such as Firefox. Find As You Type This Firefox feature really saves time hunting for words and links on a page. Just hit the slash (/) key and start typing your search word. The first instance of the word is instantly scrolled to and highlighted. If the word is a hyperlink, just hit the enter key to activate it. To find the next occurence of the word hit "Ctl-G" (Cmd-G on a Mac). Here are a couple of examples of this wonderfully useful feature: Example 1: Navigate to Hydra stats You click on "Monsters" from the home page . You get a nice index of monsters, but egad! there's a lot of links. You type "/hy" and the Hydra link is already selected! You hit "enter" and you're there. Yay! Example 2: Searching for Coup de Grace You type "Coup de Grace" into the search engine. You click on the first search result (should be the best one). You get the Combat Modifiers page. Hmm. No "Coup de Grace" in sight. You type "/coup" and presto! you're ¾ of the way down the page at the Coup de Grace description. Tabbed Browsing Another great feature of Firefox. It beats the snot out of sticky notes poking out of rulebooks. During our last game session, I had tabs open for two monsters, three spells, the condition summary, and the splash weapon rules. There are several keyboard commands  for using tabs, but I usually right-click (Ctl-click on a Mac) on the link I want, and choose "Open Link in a New Tab". Webmaster The Hypertext d20 SRD TM  is owned by BoLS Interactive LLC . Fantasy Name Generator, Fantasy World Generator, Random Adventure Generator, Random Inn Generator, d20 Random Generator, d20 Demographics generator, d20 Random Dungeon Generator, d20 Random Enocounter Generator, d20 Random Magic Shop Generator, d20 Random Treasure Generator: licensed from Douglas Rau - GOOGLE 300x250 ADS - - LEFT -  /1004459/d20srd300x250-1 - RIGHT -  /1004459/d20srd300x250-2 - END GOOGLE 300x250 ADS - The Hypertext d20 SRD TM  is owned by BoLS Interactive LLC . ‘d20 System’ and the ‘d20 System’ logo are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and are used according to the terms of the d20 System License version 6.0. A copy of this License can be found at www.wizards.com/d20 .  removing standards place holder  Quantcast Tag  End Quantcast tag 